Document for customer communication on linux key rotation (#20938)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/agent/faq/linux-key-rotation-2024.md

---
title: 2024 Linux Key Rotation
kind: guide
private: true
aliases:
  - /agent/guide/linux-key-rotation-2024
---

> As a common best practice, Datadog periodically rotates the keys and certificates used to sign Datadog's Agent packages. The Agent packages includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a common best practice, Datadog periodically rotates the keys and certificates used to sign Datadog's Agent packages. Datadog packages includes:
```

> - the different flavours of agent (datadog-agent, datadog-iot-agent, datadog-heroku-agent, datadog-dogstatsd, datadog-fips-proxy and datadog-agent-dbg).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the different flavours of Agent (`datadog-agent`, `datadog-iot-agent`, `datadog-heroku-agent` and `datadog-dogstatsd`).
```

FIPS proxy is not an Agent flavor but a separate package. The dbg packages are very rarely used, let's not mention them to prevent confusion.

> - additional agent-related packages: observability pipeline worker and the APM tracer libraries (java, python, .Net, ruby and js).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- additional packages: Observability Pipelines Worker (`observability-pipelines-worker`), FIPS proxy (`datadog-fips-proxy`) and the APM injection and tracer libraries for Java, Python, .NET, Ruby and Node.js (all `datadog-apm-*` packages) 
```

The following GPG keys, used to sign the above RPM and DEB packages, reach their end-of-life in September 2024. The rotation is planned for June 2024:

- The RPM signing key with hash [`C6559B690CA882F023BDF3F63F4D1729FD4BF915`][1] rotation is planned on June, 2024 (exact date & time to be communicated later) and replaced by the key with hash [`7408BFD56BC5BF0C361AAAE85D88EEA3B01082D3`][2]. The new trusted key needs to be installed prior installing any RPM release published after this date.
- The DEB signing key with hash [`D75CEA17048B9ACBF186794B32637D44F14F620E`][3] rotation is planned on June, 2024 (exact date & time to be communicated later) and replaced by the key with hash [`5F1E256061D813B125E156E8E6266D4AC0962C7D`][4]. APT checks the repo metadata signature, so the new key needs to be trusted by this date to install any future or existing version of the Agent from `apt.datadoghq.com`.

> Customers using Datadog's RPM or DEB packages might require a manual action to import the new key on their systems to install or upgrade the Agent packages after the rotation takes place.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're using Datadog's RPM or DEB packages, you might need to manually import the new key on your systems to install or upgrade the Agent packages after the rotation takes place.
```

> <div class="alert alert-info">
> <strong>Note</strong>: This DOES NOT affect the functionality of already running Agents. It only limits the ability to install or upgrade to a newer version of the Agent. Also, this doesn't affect Dockerized Linux Agents, Windows, or macOS Agents.
> </div>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<div class="alert alert-info">
Key rotation does not affect the functionality of already running Agents. It only limits the ability to install or upgrade to a newer version of the Agent.<br><br>Dockerized Linux Agents, Windows, or macOS Agents are not affected.
</div>
```

## Install methods that automatically trust the new GPG key

> Your host automatically trusts the new key (no further action is required) if you're using one of the following install methods:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're using one of the following installation methods, your host automatically trusts the new key and no further action is required:
```

- [Agent install script][5] v1.18.0+ (released Jun 27, 2023)
- [Chef cookbook][6] v4.18.0+ (released Jul 26, 2023)
- [Ansible role][7] v4.20.0+ (released Jul 18, 2023)
- [Ansible collection][14] v5.0.0+ (released Jul 18, 2023)
- [Puppet module][8] v3.21.0+ (released Jul 05, 2023)
- [SaltStack formula][9] v3.6+ (released Aug 10, 2023)
- [Heroku buildpack][10] v2.11+ (released Jun 15, 2023)

> - [Elastic Beanstalk][11] config templates updated as of Nov 11, 2022 or later (should contain `source: https://s3.amazonaws.com/dd-agent/scripts/install_script_agent7.sh`)

Reviewer: We released the install_script on June 27 2023, so the beanstalk date should probably be no sooner than that, right?

Author: Indeed, I took the date where it mentions install_script_agent7 for the first time...

- Containerized Agents (Docker/Kubernetes) for any version
- Windows/MacOS Agents for any version

> Additionally, installing the DEB Agent v6.48.0+ or v7.48.0+ package through `apt` from the `apt.datadoghq.com` repository installs the [`datadog-signing-keys` package](#the-datadog-signing-keys-package) version 1.3.1. It automatically ensures that your host trusts the new key. If you have `datadog-signing-keys` version 1.3.1 or later installed, no further action is needed. Versions of `datadog-signing-keys` older than version 1.3.1 don't guarantee full preparedness for the key rotation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, installing the DEB Agent v6.48.0+ or v7.48.0+ package through `apt` from the `apt.datadoghq.com` repository installs the [`datadog-signing-keys` package](#the-datadog-signing-keys-package) version 1.3.1. The `datadog-signing-keys` package automatically ensures that your host trusts the new key. If you have `datadog-signing-keys` version 1.3.1 or later installed, no further action is needed. Versions of `datadog-signing-keys` older than version 1.3.1 don't guarantee full preparedness for the key rotation.
```

If you installed Observability Pipelines Worker or APM tracer libraries **using the above install methods**, they already come with the newest keys. No further action is required.

> If you are installing the DEB Agent package from a different repository or you are not using `apt` (or a similar tool that checks repo metadata signatures), your system doesn't need to know the Datadog signing keys. No further action is needed. However, you may benefit from the [`datadog-signing-keys` package](#the-datadog-signing-keys-package).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're installing the DEB Agent package from a different repository or you are not using `apt` (or a similar tool that checks repo metadata signatures), your system doesn't need to know the Datadog signing keys. No further action is needed. However, you may benefit from the [`datadog-signing-keys` package](#the-datadog-signing-keys-package).
```

If you're unsure if a host trusts the new signing key, you can [check](#check-if-a-host-trusts-the-new-gpg-key).

> For hosts running older versions of the install methods listed above or older versions of the DEB package, Datadog recommends updating the install method to the latest version. Alternatively Debian and Ubuntu users can update the Agent to version 7.48.0+. Otherwise, the key can be [manually updated](#manual-update).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For hosts running older versions of the install methods listed above or older versions of the DEB package, Datadog recommends updating the install method to the latest version. Alternatively, Debian and Ubuntu users can update the Agent to version 7.48.0+. Otherwise, the key can be [manually updated](#manual-update).
```

```
```
The GPG keys listed for the "Datadog, Inc." repository are already installed but they are not correct for this package.
Check that the correct key URLs are configured for this repository.
```
```
Public key for datadog-agent-7.57.1-1.x86_64.rpm is not installed. Failing package is: datadog-agent-1:7.57.1-1.x86_64
```
```
Error: GPG check FAILED
```

For `apt`, this applies to both newly released and existing versions of the Agent. For `yum`, `dnf` or `zypper`, existing versions of the Agent can still be installed as long as `repo_gpgcheck=0` is set in the `datadog.repo` file.

This key rotation does not affect installations done by manually downloading the packages and installing them with `dpkg` or `rpm`. This may cause a warning for `rpm`.

## Manual update

Datadog encourages you to use one of the [install methods](#install-methods-that-automatically-trust-the-new-gpg-key) above, which trust the new GPG key as well as all future keys automatically. If this is not an option, use the following instructions to manually download and trust the new key.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Debian/Ubuntu" %}}

Run the following commands on the host:

```bash

> $ curl -o /tmp/DATADOG_APT_KEY_C0962C7D https://keys.datadoghq.com/DATADOG_APT_KEY_C0962C7D.public

Reviewer: Downloading files to /tmp can be pose some security risk. Maybe we should add a command that will verify the file checksum after this?

Author: I've changed the instruction to be aligned with what is written on manual instructions [here](https://app.datadoghq.com/account/settings/agent/latest?platform=ubuntu), wdyt?

Reviewer: That works fine, thanks!

$ sudo chmod a+r /usr/share/keyrings/datadog-archive-keyring.gpg
$ curl https://keys.datadoghq.com/DATADOG_APT_KEY_C0962C7D.public | sudo gpg --no-default-keyring --keyring /usr/share/keyrings/datadog-archive-keyring.gpg --import --batch
$ curl https://keys.datadoghq.com/DATADOG_APT_KEY_C0962C7D.public | sudo apt-key add -
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "RedHat/CentOS/SUSE" %}}

> Run the following commands on the host:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Run the following command on the host:
```

Run the following commands on the host:

```

> $ curl -o /tmp/DATADOG_RPM_KEY_B01082D3 https://keys.datadoghq.com/DATADOG_RPM_KEY_B01082D3.public

Reviewer: Same as above, let's add a command that verifies the key checksum

$ sudo rpm --import /tmp/DATADOG_RPM_KEY_B01082D3
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Check if a host trusts the new GPG key

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Debian/Ubuntu" %}}

A host correctly trusts the new key if either one of these conditions is true:

> - The file `/usr/share/keyrings/datadog-archive-keyring.gpg` exists and the Datadog source list file (usually `/etc/apt/sources.list.d/datadog.list`) contains the option `[signed-by=/usr/share/keyrings/datadog-archive-keyring.gpg]`.

Reviewer: This applies to the Agent repo; we should also provide a similar point for OPW and `/etc/apt/sources.list.d/datadog-observability-pipelines-worker.list`

Author: I rephrased and grouped the Agent and OPW with "subconditions", let me know if you agree

- The Datadog source list file doesn't contain the `signed-by` option, but `datadog-signing-keys` version 1.3.1 or later is installed, which results in the presence of a `/etc/apt/trusted.gpg.d/datadog-archive-keyring.gpg` file.

Files `/usr/share/keyrings/datadog-archive-keyring.gpg` and, optionally, `/etc/apt/trusted.gpg.d/datadog-archive-keyring.gpg` are created either by a supported [installation method](#install-methods-that-automatically-trust-the-new-gpg-key) or by installing the [`datadog-signing-keys` package](#the-datadog-signing-keys-package). Ensure that `datadog-signing-keys` version 1.3.1 or later is installed unless using one of the [installation method versions listed above](#install-methods-that-automatically-trust-the-new-gpg-key).

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "RedHat/CentOS/SUSE" %}}

Run the following command on the host:

```bash
$ rpm -qa | grep gpg-pubkey-b01082d3
```

If the key is trusted, the command has a 0 exit code and outputs:

```
gpg-pubkey-b01082d3-644161ac
```

Otherwise, the command returns a non-0 exit code with no output.

> Alternatively, check if your `datadog.repo` file contains `https://keys.datadoghq.com/DATADOG_RPM_KEY_CURRENT.public` as one of the `gpgkey` entries. This key file is updated with the new key as soon as it is in use.

Reviewer: Same as above, let's provide a similar note for OPW.

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## The `datadog-signing-keys` package

> <div class="alert alert-info"><strong>Note:</strong> This section only applies to DEB Agent package users.</div>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<div class="alert alert-info">This section only applies to DEB Agent package users.</div>
```

- datadog-agent, datadog-iot-agent, datadog-heroku-agent, datadog-dogstatsd, datadog-agent-dbg v6.48.1+ & v7.48.1+
- datadog-fips-proxy v0.5.4+
- observability-pipelines-worker v1.3.1+
- datadog-apm-inject v0.10.7+
- datadog-apm-library-python v1.18.0+
- datadog-apm-library-java v1.19.1+
- datadog-apm-library-dotnet v2.36.0+
- datadog-apm-library-js v4.11.0+
- datadog-apm-library-all v0.3+

Upon installation, this package:

- Configures APT keys in the `/usr/share/keyrings/datadog-archive-keyring.gpg` keyring and also in `/etc/apt/trusted.gpg.d/datadog-archive-keyring.gpg` when necessary. **This ensures that the upcoming APT repository signing key is trusted.** Using the package `datadog-signing-keys` version 1.3.1 is recommended to ensure preparedness for the upcoming key rotation.
- Sets up a [`debsig-verify` policy][12] for Datadog packages. This allows you to verify signatures for individual DEB packages locally.

For example, to verify that a locally downloaded DEB package was built and signed by Datadog, run the following command:

  ```bash
  $ debsig-verify datadog-dogstatsd_7.51.0-1_amd64.deb
  ```

> If the verification is successful, `debsig-verify` exits with status `0` and prints a message: `debsig: Verified package from 'Datadog, Inc.' (Datadog).`. Datadog's DEB packages embed signatures since v6.26.0/7.26.0, so this verification does not work on earlier versions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the verification is successful, `debsig-verify` exits with status `0` and prints a message: `debsig: Verified package from 'Datadog, Inc.' (Datadog).` Datadog's DEB packages embed signatures since v6.26.0/7.26.0, so this verification does not work on earlier versions.
```
